
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# PlastChem

## Project summary

Despite plastics being widely used in and highly relevant for societies,
the knowledge base on their chemical composition and the impacts of
plastic chemicals on humans and the environment is fragmented.
Accordingly, an authoritative resource that enables evidence-based
policy development to better protect public health and nature is
missing. The PlastChem project will produce such resource in form of a
high-quality state-of-the-science report that synthesizes the scientific
evidence on hazardous substances in plastics and prioritize these
chemicals and the polymers they are contained in.

To achieve this, the project will consolidate information on \>15000
plastic chemicals from existing databases, polymer mass flows,
scientific and market data to systematically compile hazard and exposure
information on chemicals and polymers. The resulting PlastChem database
will be used to group plastic chemicals according to structure and to
prioritize groups of chemicals using a weight-of-evidence approach,
considering hazard, exposure, and market data. The priority chemicals
will be linked to the polymers they are contained in based on empirical
evidence (i.e., detection in plastics). In addition, we will evaluate
the whole-migrate-toxicity of all chemicals leaching from plastic
products, thus, including unknown chemicals and mixture effects. Both
will be used to prioritize polymers widespread in society and nature,
and relevant for a circular economy. To ensure policy relevance, we will
assess and prioritize regulatory needs in close collaboration with the
advisory board and other experts. This interaction will also guide the
project implementation and ensure that the state-of-the-science report
is tailored to the pertinent policy needs.

The report and the PlastChem database as main project outputs will be
authoritative resources for developing policies that promote a non-toxic
environment in line with the Chemical Strategy for Sustainability and
the global plastic treaty.

## Project objectives

The primary objective of the PlastChem project is to produce a
state-of-the-science report of the scientific evidence on hazardous
substances in plastics. The report will provide a robust knowledge base
for informed policy development and identify regulatory needs to reduce
the spread of plastic chemicals and polymers of concern. Particularly,
PlastChem will

- provide a comprehensive overview of all plastic chemicals,
- identify groups of chemicals of concern and link those to the polymers
  and products they are used in, â€“ prioritize chemicals and polymers
  based on hazard, exposure, and market information,
- summarize mass-flow information for polymers to guide regulatory
  action to specific areas,
- synthesize the compiled scientific evidence to assess and prioritize
  the regulatory needs.

## Funding

This project is funded by the Research Council of Norway under project
number 341954.
